Hi.
My name is Brian Caffo, and
this is the Expected Values lecture
as part of the Statistical inference
course on Coursera, which is part
of our data science specialization.
This class is co-taught with my
co-instructors, Jeff Leek and
Roger Peng, relative to Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.
This class is about statistical inference.
The process of making conclusions about
populations based on noisy data that we're
going to assume was drawn from it.
The way we're going to do this, is we're
going to assume that populations and
the randomness govern, governing our
sample is given by densities and
mass functions.
So we don't have to talk
about the whole function.
We're going to talk about characteristics
of these densities and mass functions,
that are characteristics then of the
random variables that are drawn from them.
The most useful such
characterization are so
called expected values, though we've also
covered some other characterizations.
For example, sample quantiles.
Expected values, is the mean is
the most useful expected value.
It's the center of a distribution.
So you might think of as the mean changes,
the distribution just moves to the left or
the right as the mean of the distribution
moves to the left or the right.
The variance is another
characteristic of a distribution, and
it talks about how spread out it is.
And just like before in the way
that the sample quintiles estimated
the population quantiles.
The sample expected values are going to
estimate the population expected values.
So the sample mean will be
an estimate of our population mean.
And our sample variance will be an
estimation of our population variance, and
our sample standard deviation
will be an estimate of
our population standard deviation.
The expected value,
or mean of a random variable,
is the center of its distribution.
For a discrete random variable x with
a probability mass function p of x,
it's simply the summation of
the possible values that x can take,
times the probability that it takes them.
The expected value takes its idea from
the idea of the physical center of mass,
if the probabilities were weights,
were bars where their
weights were governed by the prob,
the value of the probability, and
the x was the location along
an axis that they were at-
The expected value would
simply be the center of mass.
We'll go through some
examples of that in a second.
This idea of center of mass is actually
useful in defining the sample mean.
Remember, we're talking about in
this lecture, the population mean,
which is estimated by the sample mean.
But it's interesting to note that
the sample mean is the center of mass.
If we treat each data
point as equally likely.
So, in other words,
where the probability is one over N,
and each data point xi
has that probability.
If we were to try, then find the center of
mass for the data that is exactly X bar.
So we intuitively use this idea of center
of mass even when we use a sample mean.
So, I have some code here to show an
example of taking the sample mean of data,
and how it represents the center of
mass just by drawing a histogram.
So here I have this data Galton.
And again the code can be find in the mark
down file associated with the slides that
you can get from GitHub.
So here in this case,
we have parent's heights and
children's heights in a paired data set.
And here, I have a histogram for
the child's height and
here I have the histogram for
the parent's height.
And I've overlayed
a continuous density estimate.
So I'd like to go through an example
where we actually show how moving
our finger around, will balance out that
histogram and, fortunately, in our studio,
there's a, a neat little function called
"manipulate" that will help us do this.
So, I'm going to load up "manipulate," and
then,
the code I'm going to show you in here.
But I think if you go on to
take the data products class,
which is part of the specialization here,
we'll actually go through the specifics
of how you use the manipulate function.
But here I'm just going to do it,
to show you it running.
And then we're going to look at the plot.
Okay, so here is the,
the plot of the child's heights.
It's the histogram, and I've overlaid
a continuous histogram on top of it.
And here, let's say this vertical black
line is our current estimate of the mean.
So here, it's saying that the mean is 62,
and it gives us the mean squared error.
That's sort of a measure of imbalance, how
teetering or tottering this histogram is.
Now notice as I move the mean around,
which I can do now with manipulate,
let's move it more towards
the center of the distribution.
Notice the mean has gone up.
Let's move it right here.
Notice the mean went up to 67.5, but the
means squared error dropped quite a bit.
It balances, it,
it helped balance out the histogram.
That was, almost the point where it would,
would balance it out perfectly.
And you can see as I get here,
it goes down a little bit more.
But then at some point,
it starts going back up again.
So if I move it all the way over here.
Right.
This mean squared error,
this measure of imbalance,
gets quite large.
So again, this is just illustrating the
point that the empirical mean is going to
be the point that balances out.
The empirical distribution and
we're going to use this to talk
about the population mean,
which is going to be the, the point that
balances out the population distribution.